
# REGULAR_ad v2

version 2 attempts to address a lot of the issues with v1.

# issues with v1

+ no actual "macros", all meta-instructions were compiled
    + this is inefficient because meta-compile has to be run multiple times
+ only ahead-of-time labels
    + labels were resolved immediately, which could cause issues if more padding is added
    + labels could not be referenced before they were defined (significant limitation)
+ messy code
    + lots of repeat code for buffers and reallocation

# proposed solutions
+ macros
    + keep meta-compile for basic features such as `jmp`
        + refactor to limit to two meta-compile passes
    + support defining sequences of instructions with arguments
        + these can be used as "macro instructions" with `@`
        + argument types can be checked
+ labels
    + labels are treated as "value sources" and are only resolved at the end
    + labels can additionally specify positive offsets
+ messy code
    + macro-defined buffers

# assembler-rearchitect

since "read instruction" can be more complex, it is probably better if it is read_instruction(arg1, arg2, arg3) rather than directly reading tokens. for example, when we throw macros into the mix, we have to fetch the "macro definition" and then push each of the instructions but replacing arguments.

as for value sources: this time, a jump target could reference an unresolved label. since we're resolving labels at the very end, we'd store this as a ValueSource(label, offset). at the end of assembly, we would find a matching label and resolve its absolute address.

```
struct RefValueSource {
    char* label; // label name
    int offset; // offset to label
}

struct ValueSource {
    ValueSourceKind kind; // IMM, REF
    uint8_t val; // immediate value
    RefValueSource ref; // reference to another
}
```

for the data buffer, use a structure that allocates an extra-large buffer and has a size field, so that we don't have to call realloc as much.

# assembler flow/design

## operations

### instruction info

```
struct InstructionInfo {
    InstructionType type; // INSTR_OP_I, INSTR_OP_R, etc.
    int sz; // final size of instruction
}
```

### push_statement

statement pushing takes three `ValueSource`. it stores them in the following format:

```
struct Statement {
    OPCODE op;
    ValueSource a1, a2, a3;
}
```

a statement is an abstract representation of an instruction: it symbolizes an operation done on three arguments. its arguments may be still unresolved; it is up to the parser to resolve value sources. when all values are resolved, it is directly translatable to an "Instruction", as seen below:

```
struct Instruction {
    OPCODE op;
    ARG a1, a2, a3;
}
```

### define_macro

a macro binds to zero or more arguments given after it. we scan them one by one. if an argument starts with `r`, it is a register, and if it starts with `v`, it is an immediate value. we read arguments until a `MARK`. macro information is stored in this structure:

```
struct MacroArg {
    MacroArgType type; // REG, VAL
    char* name;
}

struct Macro {
    char* name;
    MacroArg* args;
}
```

then, interpret instructions as the macro body.

## flow for parsing program
+ allocate statement buffer
    + holds the intermediate representation
    + uses ValueSource as each of its values
+ add a pad `nop` at the start (placeholder for entry point)
+ switch on token kind (generally on a line/statement basis)
    + handle directive
        + entry directive will replace the first instruction
        + data directive will add to the data buffer structure
    + handle identifier
        + label def
            + `define_label`
        + macro def
            + `define_macro`
            + interpret macro statements
        + instruction:
            + macro
                + `resolve_macro`
                + unroll the macro
                + push each instruction with substitutions
            + raw
                + `read_raw_statement -> push_statement`
+ resolve all values, iterate over instructions
    + replace any unresolved ValueSource with an immediate value

## program lexer
lexer should continue as is, but add support for the new "data" definition types.
ultimately its job is just to convert characters to tokens of a defined type that we can operate on.
